Handlebars does support layouts but it works a bit differently than it did with pug.
First of all we have to configure something, in app.js where we register our handlebars engine, we
have to pass in some options.
Now my IDE helps me here, if I hit control space it shows me which options I can set
and you can of course explore the official docs to learn all about them. Now what it allows me to do
here is it allows you to set up where my layouts live, so which folder I can find my layouts.
Let's set this here to a string which by default is views layout so you don't need to set this but you
can set it kind of to reconfirm this but this is redundant,
you only need to set it if you would store it somewhere else, like in lays or if you had a different
default views folder. I'll set it to this even though that is the default so that you see that setting,
now you can also define a default layout that should be used for all files
and here I'll just name it main and that means you will have to have a main or main layout
in my case, you will have to have a main-layout.hbs file in your layouts folder.
So let's add a main-layout.hbs
file in the layouts folder and let's set it up similarly to the pug layout and that was of course
influenced by the 404 page. So let's copy over the 404 html code into the main-layout.hbs code
and first of all page not found,
of course we want output this dynamically here, we'll output the page title here with the handlebars handlers.
Now regarding the styling, in pug we defined a block where we could dynamically add the content that
should be rendered from inside the view that extended this layout.
Unfortunately hbs doesn't have such a feature so we can't do that, we can't define a block here,
instead the only thing we can do there is we can define a placeholder with three curly braces,
opening and closing, so not normal double curly braces but three curly braces and then adding body here
and you have to exactly use this placeholder.
This is understood by handlebars and you will then be able to target this in your views that extend the
layout automatically because you set it as the default layout.
However if you have some part like this where you need to add some styling depending on the page you
are on, you will have to solve this differently, in a kind of a similar approach as we solved the active
class here in pug,
you will have to add an if statement here in
your main layout and this is of course a bit of a more cumbersome or complex way, though you can do way
more with handlebars,
you could define custom helpers that help you with that
but this is beyond the scope of this course where I just want to give you a brief introduction,
so let me show you the easiest way of solving this and this is that we add an if block here and we check
if product.css and if this is the case, let's also close the if statement here,
then I will add a link
to my product.css file
and I will repeat that same logic of course for forms
and again as I said, this is the easy solution but it will do for now.
So forms and here we have forms.css.
So this is working now,
now what regarding the active class, we also want to add that dynamically, right?
Well again we can simply add the class here
and I add my handlebars handlers here and I add an if statement and check if active shop is true
and this is a variable we'll have to pass into this view,
if that is true then I'll add the active class
and of course also close may have statement so he can also write this inline,
that is an important take away
and I'll do the same for the add product route here where I check if active add-product is true.
Of course we'll have to make sure that these variables are also passed into the view at least when they're
needed,
if you don't pass them, they're always treated as false,
so you only need to pass them if you want to have them treated as true.
With that, our layout is prepared,
now let's go back to the shop.js file to start with that and as I just mentioned, we now have
to pass in active shop, this is this variable or this property we're checking for here in the if statement
and we should set this to true for this route to ensure that for this route, the active class is added.
So let's set this to true and therefore in the main layout, this will be true and therefore active will
be rendered, active add product would be false because we don't pass it at all and therefore this would
not be rendered.
So that is that,
now of course we also need to make sure that the product.css gets rendered,
so we need to pass in this too.
So back in shop.js,
let's also pass in product.css and set this to true,
so you can already tell, you configure a lot from inside node express when using handlebars and that
is its philosophy.
So now with that set up, we can go back to the layout, have that finished and move over to shop.hbs.
Now this will use the layout by default,
you could disable this by going to the render function for a given page and setting a special layout
key and setting it to false,
this is a special key that is understood by handlebars and it would not use the default layout,
otherwise it will.
So since it will do that by default, in shop.hbs we can get rid of this entire code here,
including the header
and just have in this file what should be injected into our triple curly brace body tag in the main
layout,
so here, whatever should get entered in this place should be added to shop.hbs and nothing else.
So with that if we save this and we go to the shop, you'll see we get an error and the error is a bit annoying
to be honest with express handlebars, it's looking for the main layout.handlebars file.
So it does not take .hbs here
and for whatever reason, you explicitly have to tell handlebars to do that differently. You have to go
to the options and set the extension name which only applies to the layout and not to all files, just
as this applies to all files but the layout, you have to set the extname here
to hbs. This is really strange but it is how express handlebars works,
so now we're setting the extension to hbs for layouts too
and now if we reload this page, we see our normal shop page. And with that we can of course also go to
add product, here add-product.hbs, remove everything but the part which should be rendered in the place
of our body, triple curly brace body tags.
And if we reload, something's missing right,
do you know what went wrong?
Well we're missing some styles and the reason for that is that we need the forms and for this however,
we need to ensure that forms css is set to true,
we will also need product css by the way. So in admin.js,
we should ensure that when we rendered this route, we set forms css to true and product.css,
this one, product.css to true and that we also to get that active link in the navigation, that we
also set active add product to true because active add product is the key we're looking for here.
With that, if we save all files and we reload here,
this is looking better
and now it's all working again with handlebars.
So as you can see, handlebars uses a different philosophy,
definitely something you have to get used to,
therefore your templates are leaner. And there is no better or worse way of doing this,
it really is up to you which one you prefer.
Let's now have a look at a third option, ejs which is my personal favorite.